redux :
Redux is a state managing library used in JavaScript apps. It simply manages the state of your application or in 
other words, it is used to manage the data of the application. It is used with a library like React.
 It makes easier to manage state and data.it can be userd with any other framework like angular,vue.....
it prevents props drilling..


eg: suppose if we have multiple div say like 10 div and if i want to pass any info to the last div then the info 
should go through all the divs...so what redux will do is it will create a global store where it will store all 
the state in that store...and if any point of time anybody needs informations then they can reach out directly 
to the store..Redux stores all the application’s state in a single object, making it easy to access, update, 
and debug.



why use redux:
when we are creating an application and we have to pass props from one component to another or pass same data to 
another props then we again have to pass data through the props which creates a wishless cycle which is called 
as pop drilling..


react-redux:
react-redux is a library that provides bindings to use react and redux together in an application..


redux-toolkit:
Redux Toolkit, also known as RTK, is a package that helps developers write Redux logic more efficiently.


slice:

A slice represents a specific piece of the Redux state and contains the reducer logic, action creators,
and initial state for that part of the state.To create a slice we need to use createSlice function....






Building Parts of redux: 
 

Action
Reducer
Store

Actions:
 Actions are a plain JavaScript object that contains information. Actions are the only source of 
information for the store. actions are the only way to interact with the store.. Actions have a type field 
that tells what kind of action to perform and all other fields contain information or data. And there is 
one other term called Action Creators, these are the function that creates actions. So actions are the 
information (Objects) and action creator are functions that return these actions object.
Example: The easiest example we can take try is To-do. So we will create two action creators one for adding 
a task in to-do and for removing.


Store: 
It contains the state of the components which need to be passed to other components.store is used to hold 
the state of your application...  allows access to the state using getState().. allows state to be updated 
using dispatch(action) ...registers listeners using susbribe(listener)...handles unregistering of listeners
through the functions returned by susbribe(listener)...for creating the store we use configureStore method. 


Reducers:
The reducers in react-redux are the pure functions that contain the operations that need to be performed on 
the state.These functions accept the initial state of the state being used and the action type. function that
accepts the state and action as arguments and returns the next state of the application... It updates 
the state and responds with the new state. This updated state is sent back to the view components of the 
react to make the necessary changes. A reducer must contain the action type.the job of the reducer is to 
update the things.reducer is just anm object..

(previousstate,action)=>new state



useSelector:
useSlector is the guy who can directly talk to the store..if anyone asks the information they don't talk to the store instead they
call the useSelector hook so that they selectively ask the store what inrformation does it need..


useDispatch:
whenever you want to update some information in the store..we can do it with reducers but we cannot call reducers directly because
it will break the flow..in that case we use this hook...this hook tells the reducer to update the store..



Reducers are pure functions that handle actions and update the state.
Receive the current state and an action.
Return a new state based on the action.


three principles of redux are:
the global state of your application is stored as an object inside a single store..

the only way to change the state is to dispatch an action,an object that describes what happened..

to specify how the state tree is updated based on actions, you write pure reducers...



middlewares: 
In Redux, middlewares are functions that intercept and modify actions before they reach the reducer. 
They sit between the action dispatch and the reducer, allowing you to perform additional logic, modify 
actions, or even cancel actions.
const exampleMiddleware = store => next => action => {
  // middleware logic here
};
store provides access to dispatch and getState.
next is a function to pass the action to the next middleware (or reducer if it's the last middleware).
action is the action being dispatched.







